What is Big Data?
=> Big Data as the name suggests actually refers to the large volume of data that gets generated everyday from the big organizations like Meta, Twitter, Youtube etc. 
This data needs to be analysed so that some insights can be found which can be used for the growth and decision making of the organizations.
The customers associated with these kind of organizations are refered to as "Always Connected, Always On" customers.
BigData allows us to work, manage and analyse these large data-sets based on which we can get insights and these insights can be used by various oranizations.

So to work with BigData we need to deal with data. Data can be classified into 3 types:
1. Structured Data: Ex: RDBMS, MySQL, Excel etc.
2. Unstructured Data: Ex: SMS, video, audio etc.
3. Semi-structured Data: Ex: JSON, HTML etc.

Traditional applications can't handle such large volume of data, neither they can handle unstructured and semi-structured data.

Thus, there are 5v's which are necessary for BigData:
1. Velocity: The speed which data is generated.
2. Volume: The large amount of data that is generated.
3. Value: The data is useful or not.
4. Variety: The different kind of datas.
5. Veracity: Accuracy of the data

BigData Environment:
BigData needs to have "Distributed Architecture".
In 'Distributed Architecture', the data is distributed among multiple machines, these machines are referred as 'nodes'. Not just the data is distributed but also the processing takes place on these machines.
There is a concept of 'cluster'. 'Cluster' is collection of machines.
We need some kind of framework to handles the Big-Data cluster, the framework which handles the the Big-Data cluster is what we call as "Hadoop Framework".
NoSQL is the storage mechanism used to store different types of data.

BigData Environment: 1.Hadoop Framework
		     2.NoSQL

NoSQL stands for 'Not Only SQL'
NoSQL allows us to store various non-SQL types of data.
Types of NoSQL:
1. Key-Value: Ex: Riak, Redis
2. Column family: Ex: Cassandra, CouchDB
3. Document Storage: Ex: MongoDB, CouchDB
4. Graph Database: Ex: Neo4j, Infinite Graph
